README.md, before:

# Home AI Motion Dashboard

A minimal FastAPI + React/Vite playground that shows simulated motion events. Run it on your laptop and open the dashboard from any phone on the same Wi-Fi network.

## Backend
1. `cd backend`
2. Copy the sample environment file and adjust values as needed (keep `APP_HOST=0.0.0.0` if you want phone access on the LAN):  
   - macOS/Linux: `cp .env.example .env`  
   - Windows: `copy .env.example .env`
3. Create a virtual environment (one time setup):
   - macOS/Linux: `python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate`
   - Windows (PowerShell/CMD): `python -m venv .venv && .venv\\Scripts\\activate`
4. Install dependencies: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
5. Start the API (reads host/port + future secrets from `.env`):
   ```bash
   python main.py  # runs uvicorn main:app with reload, honoring APP_HOST / APP_PORT
   ```
   or run `uvicorn main:app --host $APP_HOST --port $APP_PORT --reload` after exporting the variables.

> Tip: `run_backend.sh` (macOS/Linux) and `run_backend.bat` (Windows) now auto-load `.env`, create the virtualenv, install requirements, and launch Uvicorn.

Endpoints:
- `POST /api/login` → exchange username/password (from `.env` defaults) for a bearer token
- `GET /api/health` → health check response includes the configured host/port
- `GET /api/motion-events` (requires token) → list of simulated events (`severity`, `zone`, `thumbnailUrl` fields included) persisted in SQLite (`APP_DB_PATH`)
- `POST /api/motion-events/simulate` (requires token) → add a new dummy event with severity/zone metadata
- `GET /api/me` (requires token) → return the signed-in username
- `POST /api/profile` (requires token) → change username/password; returns a fresh token so the UI stays authenticated
- `WS /ws` → pushes every newly created motion event to connected dashboards in real time
- `GET /api/latest-frame` → JPEG snapshot of the most recent laptop camera frame

Authentication:
- Defaults live in `backend/.env.example` (`APP_AUTH_USERNAME`, `APP_AUTH_PASSWORD`, `APP_JWT_SECRET`). Change them!
- Clients hit `POST /api/login` once, store the returned token, and send `Authorization: Bearer <token>` for protected routes / WebSocket (`ws://.../ws?token=<token>`).

### Laptop camera motion detector
- Set `CAM_MONITOR_ENABLED=true` in `backend/.env` (default in the example) to stream from your laptop webcam using OpenCV.
- The background watcher continually grabs `cv2.VideoCapture(0)` frames, blurs/grayscales them, and diff-compares with a baseline.
- When enough change is detected, it emits a motion event with `source: "laptop_cam"` and `frameTimestamp` so both the REST response and WebSocket clients stay in sync.
- If you do not want webcam access (or your device has no camera), set `CAM_MONITOR_ENABLED=false`.
- Tweaks available: `CAM_FRAME_INTERVAL`, `CAM_MOTION_THRESHOLD`, `CAM_MIN_AREA`, and `CAM_BASELINE_REFRESH_FRAMES` in `.env`.
- Windows/macOS may prompt for camera permission the first time Python/OpenCV tries to read from the webcam—allow access so events can be generated.

## Frontend
1. `cd frontend`
2. Copy the env example and update `VITE_API_BASE_URL` if your phone should hit a LAN IP (e.g., `http://192.168.1.50:8000`):  
   - macOS/Linux: `cp .env.example .env`  
   - Windows: `copy .env.example .env`
3. Install packages (creates `node_modules` and `package-lock.json`): `npm install`
4. Start the dev server: `npm run dev`
   - Runs at `http://localhost:5173`
   - Because Vite is configured with `host: '0.0.0.0'`, you can also reach it from phones on the LAN via `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>:5173`

Configuration:
- API base URL is driven by `VITE_API_BASE_URL` (see `frontend/.env.example` and `src/config.js`). Update it to your laptop's LAN IP when testing from a phone.
- UI is broken into reusable components (`Header`, `ServerInfo`, `StatsRow`, `StatusCard`, `LiveSnapshot`, `EventsList`) with a login gate. The login screen uses the backend credentials; tokens are stored in `localStorage` for now.
- Use the profile menu in the top-right corner (desktop) to update the username/password stored in SQLite or open the
  Connection Info modal (API base URL tips). Changes return a fresh JWT automatically.
- A WebSocket connection to `ws://<backend-host>/ws` keeps the motion list live; the initial fetch seeds state, and every new event streams in instantly.
- The dashboard also polls `/api/latest-frame` and displays a “live-ish” snapshot image beside the event feed so phones & laptops can see the latest frame even without a full stream.

## Running with Docker
1. From the root `home-ai-dashboard` directory, build and start everything:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f compose.yml up --build
   ```
   - Backend builds from `backend/Dockerfile` (FastAPI + Uvicorn). Healthcheck hits `/api/health`.
   - Frontend builds from `frontend/Dockerfile` (Vite build → nginx). The compose file injects `VITE_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000`, which is the address the browser uses to reach the API from your machine. Change this arg in `compose.yml` if you expose the API elsewhere.
2. Access services:
   - Backend API: `http://localhost:8000`
   - Frontend UI (nginx): `http://localhost:5173`
3. The webcam monitor is disabled inside the container (`CAM_MONITOR_ENABLED=false`) because Dockerized workloads usually can’t access the host webcam. You can still trigger events via the “Simulate Motion Event” button or by wiring in other data sources later.
4. To change the API base URL consumed by the frontend without rebuilding:
   - Edit `FRONTEND_API_BASE_URL` in a `.env` file beside `compose.yml`, **or**
   - Drop a file `config/api-base-url` containing the desired URL (e.g., `http://192.168.1.50:8000`). The frontend container mounts `./config` read-only and reads that value on start.
   - This makes it easy to switch to your laptop’s LAN IP so phones can reach the backend over Wi-Fi.
5. Stop containers when done:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f compose.yml down
   ```

## Testing on Phone
1. **Find laptop LAN IP**
   - Windows: run `ipconfig` and note the IPv4 address (e.g., `192.168.x.x`).
   - macOS/Linux: run `ifconfig` or `ip addr` for the same info.
2. **Start backend**
   - `cd backend`
   - Activate the virtualenv
   - `uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --reload` (or `python main.py`)
   - Make sure `.env` still says `APP_HOST=0.0.0.0` so phones can connect.
3. **Start frontend**
   - `cd frontend`
   - Confirm `.env` points `VITE_API_BASE_URL` to `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>:8000`
   - `npm run dev`
4. **Verify on the laptop**
   - Visit `http://localhost:5173`
   - Sign in with the credentials from `backend/.env`.
   - Confirm the health indicator shows “Connected”, motion events render, and the “Simulate Motion Event” button adds rows.
5. **Open on the phone**
   - Connect the phone to the same Wi-Fi network.
   - Open `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>:5173` (example: `http://192.168.1.50:5173`).
   - If it does not load, ensure firewall prompts for Node (Vite) and Python are allowed on private networks.
   - Once the page loads, repeat the same checks (health status, motion list, simulate button).
6. Optional: Add the page to the phone’s home screen for a lightweight app feel.

## Summary
- Backend: FastAPI served via `uvicorn` on `0.0.0.0:8000`, with host/port + future secrets loaded from `.env`.
- Frontend: React + Vite served on `0.0.0.0:5173`, configured via `VITE_API_BASE_URL` (or Docker runtime config) for LAN-friendly API calls and `ws://` streaming.
- Access from laptop using `localhost`; access from phones using `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>`. Keep both devices on the same Wi-Fi.
- This is a stub meant to host future AI-powered motion detection logic while keeping today’s wiring simple, configurable, and testable—even your built-in laptop camera can trigger events today.

Commit message:

Refracted backend main.py to app/. Improved frontend UI

README.md, after:

# Home AI Motion Dashboard

A minimal FastAPI + React/Vite playground that shows simulated motion events. Run it on your laptop and open the dashboard from any phone on the same Wi-Fi network.

## Backend
1. `cd backend`
2. Copy the sample environment file and adjust values as needed (keep `APP_HOST=0.0.0.0` if you want phone access on the LAN):  
   - macOS/Linux: `cp .env.example .env`  
   - Windows: `copy .env.example .env`
3. Create a virtual environment (one time setup):
   - macOS/Linux: `python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate`
   - Windows (PowerShell/CMD): `python -m venv .venv && .venv\\Scripts\\activate`
4. Install dependencies: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
5. Start the API (reads host/port + future secrets from `.env`):
   ```bash
   python main.py  # runs uvicorn main:app with reload, honoring APP_HOST / APP_PORT
   ```
   or run `uvicorn main:app --host $APP_HOST --port $APP_PORT --reload` after exporting the variables.

> Tip: `run_backend.sh` (macOS/Linux) and `run_backend.bat` (Windows) now auto-load `.env`, create the virtualenv, install requirements, and launch Uvicorn.

Endpoints:
- `POST /api/login` → exchange username/password (from `.env` defaults) for a bearer token
- `GET /api/health` → health check response includes the configured host/port
- `GET /api/motion-events` (requires token) → list of simulated events (`severity`, `zone`, `thumbnailUrl` fields included) persisted in SQLite (`APP_DB_PATH`)
- `POST /api/motion-events/simulate` (requires token) → add a new dummy event with severity/zone metadata
- `GET /api/me` (requires token) → return the signed-in username
- `POST /api/profile` (requires token) → change username/password; returns a fresh token so the UI stays authenticated
- `WS /ws` → pushes every newly created motion event to connected dashboards in real time
- `GET /api/latest-frame` → JPEG snapshot of the most recent laptop camera frame

Authentication:
- Defaults live in `backend/.env.example` (`APP_AUTH_USERNAME`, `APP_AUTH_PASSWORD`, `APP_JWT_SECRET`). Change them!
- Clients hit `POST /api/login` once, store the returned token, and send `Authorization: Bearer <token>` for protected routes / WebSocket (`ws://.../ws?token=<token>`).

### Laptop camera motion detector
- Set `CAM_MONITOR_ENABLED=true` in `backend/.env` (default in the example) to stream from your laptop webcam using OpenCV.
- The background watcher continually grabs `cv2.VideoCapture(0)` frames, blurs/grayscales them, and diff-compares with a baseline.
- When enough change is detected, it emits a motion event with `source: "laptop_cam"` and `frameTimestamp` so both the REST response and WebSocket clients stay in sync.
- If you do not want webcam access (or your device has no camera), set `CAM_MONITOR_ENABLED=false`.
- Tweaks available: `CAM_FRAME_INTERVAL`, `CAM_MOTION_THRESHOLD`, `CAM_MIN_AREA`, and `CAM_BASELINE_REFRESH_FRAMES` in `.env`.
- Windows/macOS may prompt for camera permission the first time Python/OpenCV tries to read from the webcam—allow access so events can be generated.

### AI object detection (CPU/GPU toggle)
- Backend can run YOLO detections on frames that already passed the motion check. Configure in `backend/.env`:
  - `AI_DETECTION_ENABLED=true|false`
  - `AI_DEVICE_MODE=cpu|gpu` (GPU attempts CUDA; falls back to CPU if unavailable)
  - `AI_MODEL_PATH` (default `models/yolov8n.pt`)
  - `AI_CONFIDENCE_THRESHOLD` and `AI_MAX_DETECTIONS`
- Model files to download:
  - CPU-friendly: `yolov8n.pt` → place at `backend/models/yolov8n.pt`
  - GPU (faster/richer): `yolov8s.pt` (or larger) → set `AI_MODEL_PATH` accordingly. Install a CUDA-enabled Torch build from https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/ if you want GPU acceleration.
- When enabled, motion events include detection summaries in the `message` plus a `detections` array (label + confidence) in the REST/WebSocket payloads.

## Frontend
1. `cd frontend`
2. Copy the env example and update `VITE_API_BASE_URL` if your phone should hit a LAN IP (e.g., `http://192.168.1.50:8000`):  
   - macOS/Linux: `cp .env.example .env`  
   - Windows: `copy .env.example .env`
3. Install packages (creates `node_modules` and `package-lock.json`): `npm install`
4. Start the dev server: `npm run dev`
   - Runs at `http://localhost:5173`
   - Because Vite is configured with `host: '0.0.0.0'`, you can also reach it from phones on the LAN via `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>:5173`

Configuration:
- API base URL is driven by `VITE_API_BASE_URL` (see `frontend/.env.example` and `src/config.js`). Update it to your laptop's LAN IP when testing from a phone.
- UI is broken into reusable components (`Header`, `ServerInfo`, `StatsRow`, `StatusCard`, `LiveSnapshot`, `EventsList`) with a login gate. The login screen uses the backend credentials; tokens are stored in `localStorage` for now.
- Use the profile menu in the top-right corner (desktop) to update the username/password stored in SQLite or open the
  Connection Info modal (API base URL tips). Changes return a fresh JWT automatically.
- A WebSocket connection to `ws://<backend-host>/ws` keeps the motion list live; the initial fetch seeds state, and every new event streams in instantly.
- The dashboard also polls `/api/latest-frame` and displays a “live-ish” snapshot image beside the event feed so phones & laptops can see the latest frame even without a full stream.

## Running with Docker
1. From the root `home-ai-dashboard` directory, build and start everything:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f compose.yml up --build
   ```
   - Backend builds from `backend/Dockerfile` (FastAPI + Uvicorn). Healthcheck hits `/api/health`.
   - Frontend builds from `frontend/Dockerfile` (Vite build → nginx). The compose file injects `VITE_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000`, which is the address the browser uses to reach the API from your machine. Change this arg in `compose.yml` if you expose the API elsewhere.
2. Access services:
   - Backend API: `http://localhost:8000`
   - Frontend UI (nginx): `http://localhost:5173`
3. The webcam monitor is disabled inside the container (`CAM_MONITOR_ENABLED=false`) because Dockerized workloads usually can’t access the host webcam. You can still trigger events via the “Simulate Motion Event” button or by wiring in other data sources later.
4. To change the API base URL consumed by the frontend without rebuilding:
   - Edit `FRONTEND_API_BASE_URL` in a `.env` file beside `compose.yml`, **or**
   - Drop a file `config/api-base-url` containing the desired URL (e.g., `http://192.168.1.50:8000`). The frontend container mounts `./config` read-only and reads that value on start.
   - This makes it easy to switch to your laptop’s LAN IP so phones can reach the backend over Wi-Fi.
5. Stop containers when done:
   ```bash
   docker compose -f compose.yml down
   ```

## Testing on Phone
1. **Find laptop LAN IP**
   - Windows: run `ipconfig` and note the IPv4 address (e.g., `192.168.x.x`).
   - macOS/Linux: run `ifconfig` or `ip addr` for the same info.
2. **Start backend**
   - `cd backend`
   - Activate the virtualenv
   - `uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --reload` (or `python main.py`)
   - Make sure `.env` still says `APP_HOST=0.0.0.0` so phones can connect.
3. **Start frontend**
   - `cd frontend`
   - Confirm `.env` points `VITE_API_BASE_URL` to `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>:8000`
   - `npm run dev`
4. **Verify on the laptop**
   - Visit `http://localhost:5173`
   - Sign in with the credentials from `backend/.env`.
   - Confirm the health indicator shows “Connected”, motion events render, and the “Simulate Motion Event” button adds rows.
5. **Open on the phone**
   - Connect the phone to the same Wi-Fi network.
   - Open `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>:5173` (example: `http://192.168.1.50:5173`).
   - If it does not load, ensure firewall prompts for Node (Vite) and Python are allowed on private networks.
   - Once the page loads, repeat the same checks (health status, motion list, simulate button).
6. Optional: Add the page to the phone’s home screen for a lightweight app feel.

## Summary
- Backend: FastAPI served via `uvicorn` on `0.0.0.0:8000`, with host/port + future secrets loaded from `.env`.
- Frontend: React + Vite served on `0.0.0.0:5173`, configured via `VITE_API_BASE_URL` (or Docker runtime config) for LAN-friendly API calls and `ws://` streaming.
- Access from laptop using `localhost`; access from phones using `http://<laptop_LAN_IP>`. Keep both devices on the same Wi-Fi.
- Optional: object detection on motion frames using YOLO with `AI_DEVICE_MODE` set to `cpu` or `gpu`.
- This is a stub meant to host future AI-powered motion detection logic while keeping today’s wiring simple, configurable, and testable—even your built-in laptop camera can trigger events today.
